Update 04.experiment-types.md (#59)
jessegmeyerlab/proteomics-tutorial: content/04.experiment-types.md

- Protein stability and small molecule binding (Thermal proteome profiling, TPP, or cellular thermal shift assay, CETSA)
- Protein-protein interactions (PPIs): AP-MS, APEX, BioID

###Protein abundance changes
A common experiment is unbiased mapping of proteins along with detection of changes in their abundance across sample groups. 
This is achieved using one of the quantitative methods mentioned elsewhere in this manuscript such as LFQ or TMT. 

> In these experiments often at least three replicates of each condition are tested to enable estimating the variance of measuring each protein. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these experiments, data should be collected from at least three biological replicates of each condition to estimate the variance of measuring each protein. 
```

With either testing scheme, the p-values from the first set of tests must be corrected for multiple tests. 
A common method for p value correction is the Benjamini-Hochberg method [@DOI:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x]. 
These types of experiments have revealed wide ranges of proteomic remodeling from various biological systems. 

### Post-Translational Modifications (PTMs)
Proteins are modified after they are translated with various chemical groups, or even by proteolytic cleavage such as n-terminal methionine removal. 
There are several proteomics methods that are developed specific to each type of modification. 
See also the section on Protein/Peptide Enrichment and Depletion.

#### Phosphoproteomics
Phosphoproteomics is the study of the phosphorylation of proteins. 
Currently, there are two techniques that are useful for phosphoproteomics: mass spectrometry and western blotting. 
A key challenge with phosphoproteomics is sensitivity; it is important to ensure that there is sufficient amount of protein before completing a phosphoproteomics project, typically at least 1 mg of total protein per sample. 

> After digestion, phosphopeptides are present but would need to be enrich in order for the sample to be detected through mass spectrometry. Various methods of enrichment have been developed over the years such mentioned in the following citations: [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0609836104; @doi:10.1038/msb4100182; @doi:10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2833; @doi:10.1126/scisignal.2000007].  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After proteolysis of the proteome, phosphopeptides need to be enriched to be detected by mass spectrometry.
Various methods of enrichment have been developed [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0609836104; @doi:10.1038/msb4100182; @doi:10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2833; @doi:10.1126/scisignal.2000007].  
See the Peptide/Protein Enrichment and Depletion section for more details.
```

Despite advancement in technology of phosphoproteomics, the following challenges still exist: limited sample amounts, highly complex samples, and huge dynamic range [@doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2008.06.006]. 

> Current approaches are limited in their ability to detect phosphoproteins at a resolution of 10-15 kD for mass spectrometry. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Additionally, phosphoproteomic analysis is often time-consuming and requires the use of expensive equipment such as enrichment kits.

### Glycoproteomics

> One PTM gaining interest due to its high occurrence and emerging functional roles is glycosylation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One PTM gaining interest due to its ubiquity and emerging functional roles is glycosylation. 
```

Protein glycosylation sites can be N-linked glycosylation sites (asparagine-linked), O-linked glycosylation sites (serine/threonine-linked). 
Understanding the function of protein glycosylation will help us understand numerous biological processes since this is a universal protein modification across all domains of life [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1093/glycob/cww086; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.019; @doi:10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-034019].

Studies of phosphorylation and glycosylation share several experimental pipeline steps including sample preparation. 
Protein clean-up approaches for glycoproteomics may differ from other proteomics experiments because glycopeptides are more hydrophilic than most peptides. 

> Some approaches that have been mentioned in literature include: filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), suspension traps (S-traps), and protein aggregation capture (PAC) [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322 ; @doi:10.1002/pmic.201300553; @doi:10.1074/mcp.TIR118.001270; @doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00505; @doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.0c04726; @doi:10.26434/chemrxiv.13487364.v1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some approaches mentioned in literature include: filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), suspension traps (S-traps), and protein aggregation capture (PAC) [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322 ; @doi:10.1002/pmic.201300553; @doi:10.1074/mcp.TIR118.001270; @doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00505; @doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.0c04726; @doi:10.26434/chemrxiv.13487364.v1].
```

> Multiple proteases may be used to increase the sequence coverage and detect more modification sites, such as: trypsin, chymotrypsin, Pepsin, WaLP/MaLP [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M113.034710], GluC, AspN, Pronase, Proteinase K,  OgpA, StcEz, BT4244, AM0627, AM1514, AM0608, Pic, ZmpC, CpaA, IMPa, PNGase F, Endo F, Endo H, and OglyZOR. [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple proteases may be used to increase the sequence coverage and detect more modification sites, such as: trypsin, chymotrypsin, Pepsin, WaLP/MaLP [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M113.034710], GluC, AspN, Pronase, Proteinase K,  OgpA, StcEz, BT4244, AM0627, AM1514, AM0608, Pic, ZmpC, CpaA, IMPa, PNGase F, Endo F, Endo H, and OglyZOR [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4].
```

Mass spectrometry has improved over the past decade so that now more strategies are available for glycoprotein structure elucidation and also for glycosylation site quantification [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4].

### Structural techniques
1. XL-MS (Cross-linking mass spectrometry)
XL-MS is an emerging technology for the field of proteomics. 
It can be used to determine changes in protein-protein interactions. 

> XL-MS covalently linking locks interacting proteins together so to preserve the interaction during MS analysis. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XL-MS covalently locks interacting proteins together to preserve interactions and proximity during MS analysis. 
```

> XL-MS is different from traditional MS in that it can resolve smaller peptides and proteins; can identify peptides in complex mixtures more accurately; can identify proteins in the presence of other proteins or peptides. [@doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.06.010; @doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XL-MS is different from traditional MS in that it requires the identification of chimeric MS/MS spectra from cross-linked peptides [@doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.06.010; @doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085].
```

The common steps in a XL-MS workflow are as follows [@DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04431]:  

> 1. Generate a system with protein-protein interactions of interest (in vitro or in vivo [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M114.042630])  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Generate a system with protein-protein interactions of interest (_in vitro_ or _in vivo_ [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M114.042630])  
```

2. Add a cross-linking reagent to covalently connect adjacent protein regions (such as disuccinimidyl sulfoxide, DSSO) [@doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085]  
3. Proteolysis to produce peptides
4. MS/MS data collection
5. Identify cross-linked peptide pairs using special software (i.e. pLink [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.2099]).
6. Generate cross-link maps for structural modeling

2. Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS)

> HDX-MS works by detecting changes in the mass of the ion in which the amide hydrogens of the protein backbone is exchanged with its surrounding solvents [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HDX-MS works by detecting changes in peptide mass due to exchange of amide hydrogens of the protein backbone is with deuterium from D2O [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y]. 
```

The rate of exchange depends on the protein solvent accessible surface area, dynamics, and the properties of the amino acid sequence [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1039/C0CS00113A; @doi:10.1016/S0065-3233(08)60129-1; @doi:10.1017/S0033583500005217].

> Although using D2O as a solvent to make deuterium labeled sample is simple, HDX-MS requires a number of controls to ensure that experimental conditions are done in an unbiased manner [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1586/epr.10.109; @doi:/10.1007/s13361-012-0377-z; @doi:10.4155/bio.15.46]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although using D2O as a solvent to make deuterium labeled sample is simple, HDX-MS requires a number of controls to ensure that experimental conditions capture the dynamics of interest [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1586/epr.10.109; @doi:/10.1007/s13361-012-0377-z; @doi:10.4155/bio.15.46]. 
If the peptide dissociation process is tuned appropriately, residue-level quantification of changes in solvent accessibility are possible within a measured peptide [@DOI:10.1021/ac0710782].
```

If done correctly, HDX can produce precise protein structure measurements with high reproducibility.

> Masson **et al.** gave recommendations on how to prep samples, conduct data analysis, and present findings in a detailed stepwise manner that will be useful to have if you are new to using this technique [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Masson *et al.* gave recommendations on how to prep samples, conduct data analysis, and present findings in a detailed stepwise manner that will be useful to have if you are new to using this technique [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y].
```

3. Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) [@doi:10.1074/jbc.REV119.006218].

> FPOP is a laser-based hydroxyl radical protein footprinting MS method that relies on the irreversible labeling of solvent-exposed amino acid side chains by hydroxyl radicals in order to understand structure elucidation of proteins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FPOP is a laser-based hydroxyl radical protein footprinting MS method that relies on the irreversible labeling of solvent-exposed amino acid side chains by hydroxyl radicals in order to understand structure of proteins.
```

> A laser produces 248 nm light to cause hydrogen peroxide to become hydroxyl radicals [@doi:10.1016/j.jasms.2005.09.008; @doi:10.1016/j.ijms.2006.08.018]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A laser produces 248 nm light that causes hydrogen peroxide to break into a pair of hydroxyl radicals [@doi:10.1016/j.jasms.2005.09.008; @doi:10.1016/j.ijms.2006.08.018]. 
```

The flow rate of solution through the capillary and laser frequency are adjusted so that each protein molecule is irradiated only once. 
After they are irradiated, the sample is collected to a tube that has catalase and free methionine in the buffer so that the H2O2 and hydroxyl radical are quenched to prevent further unwarranted oxidation, which may then modify residues that become exposed due unfolding after the initial labeling. 
Control samples are made by running the sample through the flow system without any irradiation. 

> Another experimental control is done by adding a radical scavenger with the purpose of preventing over oxidation [@doi:10.1002/pro.3408; @doi:10.1021/ac901054w].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another experimental control is done by adding a radical scavenger to tune the extent of protein oxidation [@doi:10.1002/pro.3408; @doi:10.1021/ac901054w].
```

> FPOP has wide application for proteins, to include being able to report fast protein folding and protein transient dynamics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FPOP has wide application for proteins including measurements of fast protein folding and transient dynamics.
```

4. Protein Painting [@doi:10.1038/ncomms5413; @doi:10.1074/jbc.RA118.007310].
Protein painting uses "molecular paints" to noncovalently coat the solvent accessible surface of proteins. 
These paint molecules will coat the protein surfaces but will not have access to the hydrophobic cores or protein-protein interface regions that solvents cannot access. 

> If the "paint" cover free amines of lysine side chains, the parts that are painted will not be subjected to trypsin cleavage, while the unpainted areas will. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the "paint" covers free amines of lysine side chains, the parts that are painted will not be subjected to trypsin cleavage, while the unpainted areas will. 
```

After proteolysis, the peptides samples will be subjected to MS. 

> The samples will only show the unmodified opposing regions in the protein-protein interaction at the time of the painting. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lack of proteolysis in a region is interpreted as solvent accessibility, which gives rough structural information about complex protein mixtures or even a whole proteome.
```

5. LiP-MS (limited proteolysis mass spectrometry) [@doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2020.05.006; @DOI:10.1038/nprot.2017.100; @doi:10.1038/s41596-022-00771-x; @doi:10.1038/nprot.2017.100].

> Limited proteolysis coupled to mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) is a method that tracks structural changes in complex proteoms in response to stimuli.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Limited proteolysis coupled to mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) is a method that tracks structural changes in complex proteomes in response to arbitrary stimuli.
```

Below are known methods of producing radicals for footprinting.
1. Fenton and Fenton‐like Chemistry [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.elecom.2021.106970; @doi:10.1021/es903739f]
2. Electron-Pulse Radiolysis [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2013.02.014]
3. High‐Voltage Electrical Discharge [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.ifset.2022.103055]
4. Synchrotron X‐ray Radiolysis of Water [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2017.09.005]
5. Plasma Formation of OH Radicals [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.12.017]
6. Photolysis of Hydrogen Peroxide [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.jasms.2005.09.008]

This chapter is very useful in learning more on this topic [@doi:10.1002/9781118970195.ch15].

### Protein stability and small molecule binding
1. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) [@doi:10.15252/msb.20199232; @doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2022.102225; @doi:10.1021/jacs.1c10621; @doi:10.1002/9781118970195.ch11]

> Thermal proteome profiling (TPP)  involves subjecting a protein sample to a thermal shift assay (TSA), in which the protein is exposed to a range of temperatures, and the resulting changes in protein stability are monitored using mass spectrometry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) involves subjecting a protein sample to a thermal shift assay (TSA), in which the protein is exposed to a range of temperatures, and the resulting changes in protein stability are monitored using mass spectrometry.
```

During a typical TPP experiment, a protein sample is first treated with a drug of interest to stabilize protein-ligand interactions. 
The sample is then divided into multiple aliquots, which are subjected to different temperatures in order to induce thermal denaturation. 

> The resulting changes in protein stability are detected using mass spectrometry. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting drug induced changes in protein stability curves are detected using mass spectrometry. 
```

> By comparing protein stability curves across the temperatures between treatment conditions, TPP can provide insight into the binding affinity and specificity of a given ligand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By comparing protein stability curves across the temperatures between treatment conditions, TPP can provide insight into the proteins that bind a ligand.
```

2. Cellular Thermal Shift Assay (CETSA) [@doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2019.11.004]
CETSA is the same idea as TPP, but specifically for studies of protein stability in live cells. 
The assay is capable of detecting shifts in the thermal equilibrium of cellular proteins in response to a variety of perturbations, but most commonly in response to drug treatments. 

### Protein-protein interactions (PPIs)
1. Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) [@doi:10.1002/iub.1081; @doi:10.1038/nrg3356; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.2400]  
AP-MS is an approach that involves the purification of a target protein or protein complex using a specific antibody followed by mass spectrometry analysis to identify the interacting proteins.

> In a typical AP-MS experiment, a protein or protein complex of interest is first tagged with a specific epitope or affinity tag, such as a FLAG or HA tag, that can be used to selectively capture the target protein using a corresponding antibody or resin. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a typical AP-MS experiment, a protein or protein complex of interest is first tagged with a specific epitope or affinity tag, such as a FLAG or HA tag, which is used to selectively capture the target protein using an antibody. 
```

The protein complex is then purified from the sample using a series of wash steps, and the interacting proteins are identified using mass spectrometry.
The success of AP-MS experiments depends on a number of factors, including the quality of the antibody or tag used for purification, the specificity and efficiency of the resin used for capture, and the sensitivity and resolution of the mass spectrometer. 
In addition, careful experimental design and data analysis are critical for accurate identification and interpretation of protein-protein interactions.
AP-MS has been used to study a wide range of biological processes, including signal transduction pathways, protein complexes, and protein post-translational modifications. 

> Despite its widespread use, AP-MS has some limitations, including the potential for non-specific interactions, the difficulty in interpreting complex data sets, and the possibility of missing important interacting partners due to limitations in sensitivity or specificity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AP-MS has been performed on a whole proteome scale as part of the BioPlex project [@DOI:10.1016/j.cell.2015.06.043; @DOI:10.1038/nature22366; @DOI:10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.011].
Despite its widespread use, AP-MS has some limitations, including the potential for non-specific interactions, the difficulty in interpreting complex data sets, and the possibility of missing important interacting partners due to limitations in sensitivity or specificity. 
```

> However, with continued advances in technology and data analysis methods, AP-MS is likely to remain a valuable tool for the study of protein-protein interactions and for the development of new therapeutics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, with continued advances in technology and data analysis methods, AP-MS is likely to remain a valuable tool for the study of protein-protein interactions.
```

2. APEX peroxidase [@doi:10.1038/nbt.2375; @DOI:10.1126/science.1230593]

>  APEX-MS is a labeling technique that enables biotinylation of proteins that come in close proximity to a protein of interest in living cells [@DOI:10.1016/j.molcel.2014.06.003]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APEX-MS is a labeling technique that enables genetically attaches a peroxidase to a protein of interest. 
When biotin-phenol is transiently added in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, nearby proteins are covalently biotinylated [@DOI:10.1016/j.molcel.2014.06.003]. 
APEX thereby enables discovery of interacting proteins in living cells. 
```

> By labeling cell surface proteins, APEX enables the identification and characterization of protein interactions that occur on the extracellular side of the cell membrane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

One of the major advantages of APEX is its ability to label proteins in their native environment, allowing for the identification of interactions that occur under physiological conditions. 

> In addition, APEX is able to label proteins on the extracellular side of the cell membrane, allowing for the identification of cell surface protein interactions. APEX has been used to identify a wide range of protein interactions, including receptor-ligand interactions, signaling complexes, and extracellular matrix interactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Despite its advantages, APEX has some limitations, including the potential for non-specific labeling, the difficulty in distinguishing between direct and indirect interactions, and the possibility of missing interactions that occur at low abundance or in regions of the cell that are not effectively labeled. 

> 3. Biochemical Identification of Neighbors by proximity Labeling (BioID) [@doi: 10.1074/mcp.R120.001941; @doi:10.1002/pmic.201600123; @doi:10.1091/mbc.E15-12-0844]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) [@DOI:10.1083/jcb.201112098; @doi:10.1074/mcp.R120.001941; @doi:10.1002/pmic.201600123; @doi:10.1091/mbc.E15-12-0844]
```

> Biochemical Identification of Neighbors by proximity Labeling (BioID) is a proximity labeling technique that allows for the identification of protein-protein interactions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BioID is a proximity labeling technique that allows for the identification of protein-protein interactions. 
```

> BioID involves the introduction of a genetically-encoded biotin ligase enzyme into cells, which biotinylates proteins in close proximity to the enzyme. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BioID involves the genetic tagging of a protein of interest with a promiscuous biotin ligase in live cells, which then biotinylates proteins in close proximity to the protein of interest. 
```

> By labeling proteins that are in close proximity to the biotin ligase, BioID enables the identification and characterization of protein interactions that occur in living cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

One of the advantages of BioID is its ability to label proteins in their native environment, allowing for the identification of interactions that occur under physiological conditions. 
BioID has been used to identify a wide range of protein interactions, including receptor-ligand interactions, signaling complexes, and protein localization.

> Despite its many advantages, BioID has some limitations, including the potential for non-specific labeling, the difficulty in distinguishing between direct and indirect interactions, and the possibility of missing interactions that occur at low abundance or in regions of the cell that are not effectively labeled. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BioID is a slower reaction than APEX and therefore may pick up more transient interactions.
BioID has the same limitations as APEX. 
```

- Protein stability and small molecule binding (Thermal proteome profiling, TPP, or cellular thermal shift assay, CETSA)
- Protein-protein interactions (PPIs): AP-MS, APEX, BioID

###Protein abundance changes
A common experiment is unbiased mapping of proteins along with detection of changes in their abundance across sample groups. 
This is achieved using one of the quantitative methods mentioned elsewhere in this manuscript such as LFQ or TMT. 

> In these experiments often at least three replicates of each condition are tested to enable estimating the variance of measuring each protein for statistics. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these experiments often at least three replicates of each condition are tested to enable estimating the variance of measuring each protein. 
```

> Depending on the experiment design, changes in the measured protein abundances between groups are assessed using statistics. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the experiment design, different statistical tests are used to ask if there are changes in the measured protein abundances between groups. 
```

If there are only two groups, the quantities might be compared with a t-test or with a Wilcoxon signed-rank test. 
The latter is a non-parametric version of the t-test. 
If there are more than two sample groups, then often Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) is used instead. 
With either testing scheme, the p-values from the first set of tests must be corrected for multiple tests. 
A common method for p value correction is the Benjamini-Hochberg method [@DOI:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x]. 
These types of experiments have revealed wide ranges of proteomic remodeling from various biological systems. 

> ### Post-Translational Modifications (PTMs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Post-Translational Modifications (PTMs)
```

Proteins are modified after they are translated with various chemical groups, or even by proteolytic cleavage such as n-terminal methionine removal. 
There are several proteomics methods that are developed specific to each type of modification. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See also the section on Protein/Peptide Enrichment and Depletion.

```

#### Phosphoproteomics

> Phosphoproteomics is the study of the phosphorylation of proteins which can be used to identify proteins, associated proteins, and their post-translational modifications. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Phosphoproteomics is the study of the phosphorylation of proteins. 
```

Currently, there are two techniques that are useful for phosphoproteomics: mass spectrometry and western blotting. 

> As seen in the figure above, quantitative proteomics over a variety of analytical techniques. 

Reviewer: Did you make a figure for this or what figure does this refer to?

Author: Haha, I need to rewrite that, apologies on that, but if you think a figure is needed, I can make it.

Reviewer: we don't need one, maybe just delete the sentence then?

Reviewer: we don't need one, maybe just delete the sentence then?

> - Mass spectrometry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Mass spectrometry

> One of the ways to use mass spectrometry to detect phosphorylation is by adding a stable isotope in order to see where phosphorylation would happen that can be seen at the proteome level [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0609836104; @doi:10.1038/msb4100182; @doi:10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2833; @doi:10.1126/scisignal.2000007].  

Reviewer: I'm not sure what is meant by "adding a stable isotope to see where a phosphorylation would happen". I checked the citations and only one of them mentioned isotopes but that was related to iTRAQ which would not specifically help localize the phosphorylation. Can you please clarify?

> It is important to understand what methodology you are planning to use before running the experiments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Despite advancement in technology of phosphoproteomics, the following challenges still exist: limited sample amounts, highly complex samples, and huge dynamic range [@doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2008.06.006]. 

> Current approaches are limited in their ability to detect phosphoproteins at a resolution of 10-15 kD. 

Reviewer: does this refer to detection by western blot?

Additionally, phosphoproteomic analysis is often time-consuming and requires the use of expensive equipment such as enrichment kits.

### Glycoproteomics
One PTM gaining interest due to its high occurrence and emerging functional roles is glycosylation. 

> Protein glycosylation sites can be glycosylphosphates, N-linked glycosylation sites (asparagine-linked), O-linked glycosylation sites (serine/threonine-linked), or Z-linked glycosylation sites. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protein glycosylation sites can be N-linked glycosylation sites (asparagine-linked), O-linked glycosylation sites (serine/threonine-linked). 
```
Looks like glycosylphosphates are a glycosylating reagent, and I can't find any mention of z-linked glycosylation when I google it. Can you either clarify or we can remove those two

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Understanding protein glycosylation will help us understand numerous biological processes since this is a universal protein modification that can be seen across all domains of life [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1093/glycob/cww086; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.019; @doi:10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-034019].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Understanding the function of protein glycosylation will help us understand numerous biological processes since this is a universal protein modification across all domains of life [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1093/glycob/cww086; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.019; @doi:10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-034019].
```

> Studies of these two PTMs share several experimental pipelines steps including sample preparation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Studies of phosphorylation and glycosylation share several experimental pipeline steps including sample preparation. 
```

Protein clean-up approaches for glycoproteomics may differ from other proteomics experiments because glycopeptides are more hydrophilic than most peptides. 
Some approaches that have been mentioned in literature include: filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), suspension traps (S-traps), and protein aggregation capture (PAC) [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322 ; @doi:10.1002/pmic.201300553; @doi:10.1074/mcp.TIR118.001270; @doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00505; @doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.0c04726; @doi:10.26434/chemrxiv.13487364.v1].

> Some enzymatic digestion to use include: trypsin, chymotrypsin, tryptophan, tyrosine, GluC, AspN, Pronase, Proteinase K,  OgpA, StcEz, BT4244, AM0627, AM1514, AM0608, Pic, ZmpC, CpaA, IMPa, PNGase F, Endo F, Endo H, and OglyZOR. [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple proteases may be used to increase the sequence coverage and detect more modification sites, such as: trypsin, chymotrypsin, Pepsin, WaLP/MaLP [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M113.034710], GluC, AspN, Pronase, Proteinase K,  OgpA, StcEz, BT4244, AM0627, AM1514, AM0608, Pic, ZmpC, CpaA, IMPa, PNGase F, Endo F, Endo H, and OglyZOR. [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4]
```

Mass spectrometry has improved over the past decade so that now more strategies are available for glycoprotein structure elucidation and also for glycosylation site quantification [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4].

### Structural techniques
1. XL-MS (Cross-linking mass spectrometry)

> XL-MS is an emerging technology for the field of proteomics. It can be used to determine the protein folding and assembly, the dynamics of macromolecules in solution, and the effects of protein modifications on protein function. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XL-MS is an emerging technology for the field of proteomics. 
It can be used to determine changes in protein-protein interactions. 
```

> XL-MS allows molecules to be more stable which then can be ionized and fragmented. XL-MS is different from traditional MS in that it can resolve smaller peptides and proteins; can identify peptides in complex mixtures more accurately; can identify proteins in the presence of other proteins or peptides. [@doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.06.010; @doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XL-MS covalently linking locks interacting proteins together so to preserve the interaction during MS analysis. 
XL-MS is different from traditional MS in that it can resolve smaller peptides and proteins; can identify peptides in complex mixtures more accurately; can identify proteins in the presence of other proteins or peptides. [@doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.06.010; @doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085] 
```
In the second sentence, its not clear to me why "it can resolve smaller peptides and proteins; can identify peptides in complex mixtures more accurately; ". Can you please clarify?

For the third point, are you referring to the need to identify MS/MS spectra that are chimeras of two peptides?

> Following are some suggestive steps as to creating a XL-MS workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The common steps in a XL-MS workflow are as follows [@DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04431]:  
```

1. Select ion of interest if it is targeted proteomics.
2. Cross-link the molecular ion through a cross-linking agent (DSS, BS3, EDC, DMTMM, DSG, BS2G, DSSO, DSBU, CBDPS, PIR). [@doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085]
3. Determine the cross-linking efficiency through binding energy and calculations.

> 4. Determine the number is cross-links which then will help you know the molecular weight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Generate a system with protein-protein interactions of interest (in vitro or in vivo [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M114.042630])  
2. Add a cross-linking reagent to covalently connect adjacent protein regions (such as disuccinimidyl sulfoxide, DSSO) [@doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085]  
3. Proteolysis to produce peptides
4. MS/MS data collection
5. Identify cross-linked peptide pairs using special software (i.e. pLink [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.2099]).
6. Generate cross-link maps for structural modeling
```

There are still some challenges in XL-MS such as:

> 1. minimum amount of cross-linked peptides in complex mixtures [@doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04431]

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this means?

Reviewer: still not sure what is meant by "minimum amount of cross linked peptides in complex mixtures" and why its a problem?

> 2. diversity of cross linked products [@doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04431]

Reviewer: can you please elaborate what you mean and why that is a problem?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

HDX-MS works by detecting changes in the mass of the ion in which the amide hydrogens of the protein backbone is exchanged with its surrounding solvents [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y]. 
The rate of exchange depends on the protein solvent accessible surface area, dynamics, and the properties of the amino acid sequence [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1039/C0CS00113A; @doi:10.1016/S0065-3233(08)60129-1; @doi:10.1017/S0033583500005217].
Although using D2O as a solvent to make deuterium labeled sample is simple, HDX-MS requires a number of controls to ensure that experimental conditions are done in an unbiased manner [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1586/epr.10.109; @doi:/10.1007/s13361-012-0377-z; @doi:10.4155/bio.15.46]. 
If done correctly, HDX can produce precise protein structure measurements with high reproducibility.
Masson **et al.** gave recommendations on how to prep samples, conduct data analysis, and present findings in a detailed stepwise manner that will be useful to have if you are new to using this technique [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y].

3. Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) [@doi:10.1074/jbc.REV119.006218].

> FPOP is a laser based hydroxyl radical protein footprinting MS method that relies on the irreversible labeling of solvent-exposed amino acid side chains by hydroxyl radicals in order to understand structure elucidation of proteins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FPOP is a laser-based hydroxyl radical protein footprinting MS method that relies on the irreversible labeling of solvent-exposed amino acid side chains by hydroxyl radicals in order to understand structure elucidation of proteins.
```

A laser produces 248 nm light to cause hydrogen peroxide to become hydroxyl radicals [@doi:10.1016/j.jasms.2005.09.008; @doi:10.1016/j.ijms.2006.08.018]. 

> The flow rate of solution through the capillary and laser frequency are adjusted so that each protein molecule is radiated only once. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The flow rate of solution through the capillary and laser frequency are adjusted so that each protein molecule is irradiated only once. 
```

> After they are radiated, the sample is collected to a tube that has catalase and free methionine in the buffer so that the H2O2 and hydroxyl radical are quenched to prevent further unwarranted oxidation, which may then modify residues that become exposed due unfolding after the initial labeling. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After they are irradiated, the sample is collected to a tube that has catalase and free methionine in the buffer so that the H2O2 and hydroxyl radical are quenched to prevent further unwarranted oxidation, which may then modify residues that become exposed due unfolding after the initial labeling. 
```

> Control samples are made through running the sample through the flow system without any radiation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Control samples are made by running the sample through the flow system without any irradiation. 
```

FPOP has wide application for proteins, to include being able to report fast protein folding and protein transient dynamics.

4. Protein Painting [@doi:10.1038/ncomms5413; @doi:10.1074/jbc.RA118.007310].
Protein painting uses "molecular paints" to noncovalently coat the solvent accessible surface of proteins. 
These paint molecules will coat the protein surfaces but will not have access to the hydrophobic cores or protein-protein interface regions that solvents cannot access. 
If the "paint" cover free amines of lysine side chains, the parts that are painted will not be subjected to trypsin cleavage, while the unpainted areas will. 
After proteolysis, the peptides samples will be subjected to MS. 
The samples will only show the unmodified opposing regions in the protein-protein interaction at the time of the painting. 

5. LiP-MS (limited proteolysis mass spectrometry) [@doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2020.05.006; @DOI:10.1038/nprot.2017.100; @doi:10.1038/s41596-022-00771-x; @doi:10.1038/nprot.2017.100].
Limited proteolysis coupled to mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) is a method that tracks structural changes in complex proteoms in response to stimuli.

> This method relies on the usage of stimuli (small molecules and proteinase K (PK)) as the additions would cause tertiary and quaternary structures. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea is to detect changes in protease-accessible protein regions due to the perturbation.
For example, a drug binding may make a disordered region protected from non-specific proteolysis. 
```

> Samples that undergo LiP-MS will show at where the structural changes will happen and give an understanding as to why PK bind to that spot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LiP-MS can therefore provide a somewhat unbiased view of structural changes at the proteome scale.
This may be useful when attempting to discover a mechanism for some treatment that causes a phenotype. 
```

> For protocols and ways to run LiP-MS, please refer to this document: [@url:https://www.eubopen.org/sites/www.eubopen.org/files/attachments/2022/LiP-MS%20protocol.pdf]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information about LiP-MS, please refer to this document: [@url:https://www.eubopen.org/sites/www.eubopen.org/files/attachments/2022/LiP-MS%20protocol.pdf]
```

6. Radical Footprinting 
This technique uses hydroxyl radical footprinting and MS in order to elucidate protein structures, assembly, and interactions within a large macromolecule [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @DOI:10.1021/ac200567u].
In addition to proteomics applications, various approaches to make hydroxide radicals have also been applied for footprinting studies in nucleic acid/ligand interactions [@doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2005.02.009; @doi:10.1002/0471142700.nc0607s07; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkz089].
Below are known methods of producing radicals for footprinting.

> 2dli

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

1. Fenton and Fenton‐like Chemistry [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.elecom.2021.106970; @doi:10.1021/es903739f]
2. Electron-Pulse Radiolysis [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2013.02.014]
3. High‐Voltage Electrical Discharge [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.ifset.2022.103055]
4. Synchrotron X‐ray Radiolysis of Water [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2017.09.005]
5. Plasma Formation of OH Radicals [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.12.017]
6. Photolysis of Hydrogen Peroxide [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.jasms.2005.09.008]

> This chapter is very useful in learning more on this topic. [@doi:10.1002/9781118970195.ch15]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter is very useful in learning more on this topic [@doi:10.1002/9781118970195.ch15].
```

### Protein stability and small molecule binding
1. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) [@doi:10.15252/msb.20199232; @doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2022.102225; @doi:10.1021/jacs.1c10621; @doi:10.1002/9781118970195.ch11]
Thermal proteome profiling (TPP)  involves subjecting a protein sample to a thermal shift assay (TSA), in which the protein is exposed to a range of temperatures, and the resulting changes in protein stability are monitored using mass spectrometry.

> During a typical TPP experiment, a protein sample is first treated with a crosslinker to stabilize protein-ligand interactions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During a typical TPP experiment, a protein sample is first treated with a drug of interest to stabilize protein-ligand interactions. 
```

The sample is then divided into multiple aliquots, which are subjected to different temperatures in order to induce thermal denaturation. 

> As the protein denatures, the ligand is released, and the resulting changes in protein stability are detected using mass spectrometry. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting changes in protein stability are detected using mass spectrometry. 
```

> By comparing the protein-ligand interactions across the different temperature conditions, TPP can provide insight into the binding affinity and specificity of a given ligand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By comparing protein stability curves across the temperatures between treatment conditions, TPP can provide insight into the binding affinity and specificity of a given ligand.
```

2. Cellular Thermal Shift Assay (CETSA) [@doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2019.11.004]

> CETSA is a powerful tool for studying protein-protein interactions in live cells. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CETSA is the same idea as TPP, but specifically for studies of protein stability in live cells. 
```

> Although CTSA has been widely used to study protein-protein interactions in a proteome-wide manner, little is known about the global changes of protein interaction states with the energy landscape. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The assay is capable of detecting shifts in the thermal equilibrium of cellular proteins in response to a variety of environmental perturbations, including the application of voltage, temperature, or magnetic fields. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The assay is capable of detecting shifts in the thermal equilibrium of cellular proteins in response to a variety of perturbations, but most commonly in response to drug treatments. 
```

> This assay is able to detect both small and large changes in protein interaction states, making it an ideal tool for investigating the effects of environmental stressors on protein interactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Protein-protein interactions (PPIs)

> 1. Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) [@doi:10.1002/iub.1081; @doi:10.1038/nrg3356; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.2400]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) [@doi:10.1002/iub.1081; @doi:10.1038/nrg3356; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.2400]  
```

> Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS)is an approach that involves the purification of a target protein or protein complex using a specific antibody or tag, followed by mass spectrometry analysis to identify the interacting proteins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AP-MS is an approach that involves the purification of a target protein or protein complex using a specific antibody followed by mass spectrometry analysis to identify the interacting proteins.
```

The success of AP-MS experiments depends on a number of factors, including the quality of the antibody or tag used for purification, the specificity and efficiency of the resin used for capture, and the sensitivity and resolution of the mass spectrometer. 
In addition, careful experimental design and data analysis are critical for accurate identification and interpretation of protein-protein interactions.
AP-MS has been used to study a wide range of biological processes, including signal transduction pathways, protein complexes, and protein post-translational modifications. 
Despite its widespread use, AP-MS has some limitations, including the potential for non-specific interactions, the difficulty in interpreting complex data sets, and the possibility of missing important interacting partners due to limitations in sensitivity or specificity. 
However, with continued advances in technology and data analysis methods, AP-MS is likely to remain a valuable tool for the study of protein-protein interactions and for the development of new therapeutics.

> 2. Avidity-based Extracellular Interaction Screen (APEX) [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-9-529; @doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-9537-0_4; @doi:10.1155/2010/840518]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. APEX peroxidase [@doi:10.1038/nbt.2375; @DOI:10.1126/science.1230593]
```
The first and third citations were about an unrelated APEX method for protein quant

> Avidity-based Extracellular Interaction Screen (APEX) is a proximity labeling technique that allows for the identification of cell surface protein interactions in living cells. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 APEX-MS is a labeling technique that enables biotinylation of proteins that come in close proximity to a protein of interest in living cells [@DOI:10.1016/j.molcel.2014.06.003]. 
```
"Avidity-based Extracellular Interaction Screen" appears to be a different method from APEX called AVEXIS https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3460577/

Based on the rest of the paragraph it appears you meant to write about AVEXIS but that technique is not a proteomic technique and therefore outside the scope of this manuscript. Can you either write about the method I changed the citations to or remove this section?

Author: Yep, I'll make the change, thanks for catching that!

Despite its advantages, APEX has some limitations, including the potential for non-specific labeling, the difficulty in distinguishing between direct and indirect interactions, and the possibility of missing interactions that occur at low abundance or in regions of the cell that are not effectively labeled. 

3. Biochemical Identification of Neighbors by proximity Labeling (BioID) [@doi: 10.1074/mcp.R120.001941; @doi:10.1002/pmic.201600123; @doi:10.1091/mbc.E15-12-0844]
Biochemical Identification of Neighbors by proximity Labeling (BioID) is a proximity labeling technique that allows for the identification of protein-protein interactions. 
BioID involves the introduction of a genetically-encoded biotin ligase enzyme into cells, which biotinylates proteins in close proximity to the enzyme. 
By labeling proteins that are in close proximity to the biotin ligase, BioID enables the identification and characterization of protein interactions that occur in living cells.

> One of the advantages of BioID is its ability to label proteins in their native environment, allowing for the identification of interactions that occur under physiological conditions. In addition, BioID is able to label proteins that are not easily accessible by other proximity labeling techniques, such as APEX. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the advantages of BioID is its ability to label proteins in their native environment, allowing for the identification of interactions that occur under physiological conditions. 
In addition, BioID is able to label proteins that are not easily accessible by other proximity labeling techniques, such as APEX. 
```
Can you add why bioID can label proteins that are not accessible by APEX? The reason is not immediately obvious to me

- Protein stability and small molecule binding (Thermal proteome profiling, TPP, or cellular thermal shift assay, CETSA)
- Protein-protein interactions (PPIs): AP-MS, APEX, BioID

###Protein abundance changes

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common experiment is unbiased mapping of proteins along with detection of changes in their abundance across sample groups. 
This is achieved using one of the quantitative methods mentioned elsewhere in this manuscript such as LFQ or TMT. 
In these experiments often at least three replicates of each condition are tested to enable estimating the variance of measuring each protein for statistics. 
Depending on the experiment design, changes in the measured protein abundances between groups are assessed using statistics. 
If there are only two groups, the quantities might be compared with a t-test or with a Wilcoxon signed-rank test. 
The latter is a non-parametric version of the t-test. 
If there are more than two sample groups, then often Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) is used instead. 
With either testing scheme, the p-values from the first set of tests must be corrected for multiple tests. 
A common method for p value correction is the Benjamini-Hochberg method [@DOI:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x]. 
These types of experiments have revealed wide ranges of proteomic remodeling from various biological systems. 
```

> ### Phosphoproteomics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Post-Translational Modifications (PTMs)
Proteins are modified after they are translated with various chemical groups, or even by proteolytic cleavage such as n-terminal methionine removal. 
There are several proteomics methods that are developed specific to each type of modification. 

#### Phosphoproteomics
```

> Phosphoproteomics is the study of the phosphorylation of proteins which can be used to identify proteins, associated proteins, and their post-translational modifications. Currently, there are three techniques that are useful for phosphoproteomics: mass spectrometry and western blotting. As seen in the figure above, quantitative proteomics over a variety of analytical techniques. Ensure that there is sufficient amount of protein before completing a phosphoproteomics project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Phosphoproteomics is the study of the phosphorylation of proteins which can be used to identify proteins, associated proteins, and their post-translational modifications. 
Currently, there are two techniques that are useful for phosphoproteomics: mass spectrometry and western blotting. 
As seen in the figure above, quantitative proteomics over a variety of analytical techniques. 
A key challenge with phosphoproteomics is sensitivity; it is important to ensure that there is sufficient amount of protein before completing a phosphoproteomics project, typically at least 1 mg of total protein per sample. 
```

Reviewer: Which figure is this referring to? did you make one?

- Mass spectrometry

> One of the ways to use mass spectrometry to detect phosphorylation is by adding a stable isotope in order to see where phosphorylation would happen that can be seen at the proteome level. [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0609836104; @doi:10.1038/msb4100182; @doi:10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2833; @doi:10.1126/scisignal.2000007]  It is important to understand what methodology you are planning to use before running the experiments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the ways to use mass spectrometry to detect phosphorylation is by adding a stable isotope in order to see where phosphorylation would happen that can be seen at the proteome level [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0609836104; @doi:10.1038/msb4100182; @doi:10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2833; @doi:10.1126/scisignal.2000007].  
It is important to understand what methodology you are planning to use before running the experiments.
```

Reviewer: Can you please clarify the first sentence? I don't understand what you mean by adding a stable isotope, and the first two papers don't reference anything about stable isotopes. Looks like the third may use itraq,

> Despite advancement in technology of phosphoproteomics, the following challenges still exist: limited sample amounts, highly complex samples, and huge dynamic range [@doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2008.06.006]. Current approaches are limited in their ability to detect phosphoproteins at a resolution of 10-15 kD. Additionally, phosphoproteomic analysis is often time-consuming and requires the use of expensive equipment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite advancement in technology of phosphoproteomics, the following challenges still exist: limited sample amounts, highly complex samples, and huge dynamic range [@doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2008.06.006]. 
Current approaches are limited in their ability to detect phosphoproteins at a resolution of 10-15 kD. 
Additionally, phosphoproteomic analysis is often time-consuming and requires the use of expensive equipment such as enrichment kits.
```

### Glycoproteomics

> The goal of glycoproteomics is to understand the interactions between proteins and glycoproteins and to gain insights into the function and regulation of glycoprotein expression. Understanding protein glycosylation will help us understand numerous biological processes since this is a universal protein modification that can be seen across all domains of life [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1093/glycob/cww086; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.019; @doi:10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-034019] The glycosylation sites can be glycosylphosphates, N-linked glycosylation sites (asparagine-linked), O-linked glycosylation sites (serine/threonine-linked), or Z-linked glycosylation sites. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One PTM gaining interest due to its high occurrence and emerging functional roles is glycosylation. 
Protein glycosylation sites can be glycosylphosphates, N-linked glycosylation sites (asparagine-linked), O-linked glycosylation sites (serine/threonine-linked), or Z-linked glycosylation sites. 
Understanding protein glycosylation will help us understand numerous biological processes since this is a universal protein modification that can be seen across all domains of life [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1093/glycob/cww086; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.019; @doi:10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-034019].

```

> Experimental pipelines key steps that are shared

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Studies of these two PTMs share several experimental pipelines steps including sample preparation. 
```

Reviewer: If you get to this before me, can you please also change this to one sentence per line throughout?

> - sample selection 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - sample preparation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Protein clean-up approaches for glycoproteomics may differ in other areas as the solubility may differ. Some approaches that have been mentioned in literature include: filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), suspension traps (S-traps), and protein aggregation capture (PAC) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protein clean-up approaches for glycoproteomics may differ from other proteomics experiments because glycopeptides are more hydrophilic than most peptides. 
Some approaches that have been mentioned in literature include: filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), suspension traps (S-traps), and protein aggregation capture (PAC) [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322 ; @doi:10.1002/pmic.201300553; @doi:10.1074/mcp.TIR118.001270; @doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00505; @doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.0c04726; @doi:10.26434/chemrxiv.13487364.v1].
```

> If you're interested in looking at some of the approaches that some used, please look at the following citations: [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322 ; @doi:10.1002/pmic.201300553; @doi:10.1074/mcp.TIR118.001270; @doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00505; @doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.0c04726; @doi:10.26434/chemrxiv.13487364.v1)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - enzymatic digestion of samples to enable access to desired glycopeptides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Some enzymatic digestion to use include: trypsin, chymotrypsin, tryptophan, tyrosine, GluC, AspN, Pronase, Proteinase K,  OgpA, StcEz, BT4244, AM0627, AM1514, AM0608, Pic, ZmpC, CpaA, IMPa, PNGase F, Endo F, Endo H, and OglyZOR. [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4]

> - separation of glycopeptides from non-glycosylated peptides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - analysis of glycopeptides using MS strategies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Mass spectrometry has improved over the past decade so that now more strategies that can quantitatively analyze glycosylation sites in proteins. [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4] The other use for mass spectrometry for glycoproteomics is structure elucidation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mass spectrometry has improved over the past decade so that now more strategies are available for glycoprotein structure elucidation and also for glycosylation site quantification [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4].
```

### Structural techniques
1. XL-MS (Cross-linking mass spectrometry)

> XL-MS is an emerging technology for the field of proteomics. It can be used to determine the protein folding and assembly, the dynamics of macromolecules in solution, and the effects of protein modifications on protein function. XL-MS allows molecules to be more stable which then can be ionized and fragmented. XL-MS is different from traditional MS in that it can resolve smaller peptides and proteins; can identify peptides in complex mixtures more accurately; can identify proteins in the presence of other proteins or peptides. [@doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.06.010; @doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XL-MS is an emerging technology for the field of proteomics. 
It can be used to determine protein-protein interaction partners, protein folding and complex assembly, the dynamics of macromolecules in solution, and the effects of protein modifications on protein structure [@doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.06.010; @doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085]. 
XL-MS locks structural features in place covalently before destructive sample preparation and mass spectrometry.  
XL-MS is different from traditional MS/MS in that spectra now contain two peptides that must be identified instead of one [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.2099; @DOI:10.1007/s13361-011-0261-2].
```

Reviewer: parts of the last statement were not clear to me so I removed the, Why would XL-MS resolve smaller peptides and enable more accurate identification? I think it would be biased toward identifying shorter peptides if that is what you meant. I think the identification is more challenging so I tried to capture that in the rewording

Following are some suggestive steps as to creating a XL-MS workflow:

> 1. Determine m/z of ion to be analyzed (generally through collision-induced dissociation), and determine multiplicity of it through measuring the fragment ion energy and some calculation.

Reviewer: I dont understand this point can you please clarify and maybe provide a reference to what is meant?

Author: Can you clarify which line?

Reviewer: The line 1. determine the m/z of ion to be analyzed...

2. Cross-link the molecular ion through a cross-linking agent (DSS, BS3, EDC, DMTMM, DSG, BS2G, DSSO, DSBU, CBDPS, PIR). [@doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085]
3. Determine the cross-linking efficiency through binding energy and calculations.
4. Determine the number is cross-links which then will help you know the molecular weight.

There are still some challenges in XL-MS such as:

> 1. minimum amount of cross-linked peptides in complex mixtures [@doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04431]

Reviewer: Can you please clarify?

Author: Can you clarify which line?

Reviewer: "4. Determine the number..."

2. diversity of cross linked products [@doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04431]

> However, even though these challenges are an issue of now, we can expect further advancement to where this should not be an issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, further advancements will continue to minimize the impact of these issues.
```

2. Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS)

> HDX-MS works by detecting changes in the mass of the ion in which the amide hydrogens of the protein backbone is exchanged with its surrounding solvents. [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y]. The rate of exchange depends on the protein folding state, dynamics, and the properties of the amino acid sequence. [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1039/C0CS00113A; @doi:10.1016/S0065-3233(08)60129-1; @doi:10.1017/S0033583500005217] Although using D2O as a solvent to make deuterium labeled sample is simple, HDX-MS requires a number of controls to ensure that experimental conditions are done in an unbiased manner. [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1586/epr.10.109; @doi:/10.1007/s13361-012-0377-z; @doi:10.4155/bio.15.46] This will produce precise measurements and high reproducibility if done correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HDX-MS works by detecting changes in the mass of the ion in which the amide hydrogens of the protein backbone is exchanged with its surrounding solvents [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y]. 
The rate of exchange depends on the protein solvent accessible surface area, dynamics, and the properties of the amino acid sequence [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1039/C0CS00113A; @doi:10.1016/S0065-3233(08)60129-1; @doi:10.1017/S0033583500005217].
Although using D2O as a solvent to make deuterium labeled sample is simple, HDX-MS requires a number of controls to ensure that experimental conditions are done in an unbiased manner [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1586/epr.10.109; @doi:/10.1007/s13361-012-0377-z; @doi:10.4155/bio.15.46]. 
If done correctly, HDX can produce precise protein structure measurements with high reproducibility.
```

> [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y] gives recommendations on how to prep samples, conduct data analysis, and present findings in a detailed stepwise manner that will be useful to have if you are new to using this technique.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Masson **et al.** gave recommendations on how to prep samples, conduct data analysis, and present findings in a detailed stepwise manner that will be useful to have if you are new to using this technique [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y].
```

> 3. Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP ) [@doi:10.1074/jbc.REV119.006218]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) [@doi:10.1074/jbc.REV119.006218].
```

> Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) is a laser based HRPF (hydroxyl radical protein footprinting) MS method that relies on the irreversible labeling of solvent-exposed amino acid side chains by hydroxyl radicals in order to understand structure elucidation of proteins. The laser is set at 248 nm and will cause the hydrogen peroxides to become hydroxyl radicals. [@doi:10.1016/j.jasms.2005.09.008; @doi:10.1016/j.ijms.2006.08.018] The flow rate and laser frequency are adjusted in the flow system so that each protein molecule is radiated only once. After they are radiated, the sample is collected to a tube that has catalase and free methionine in buffer so that the H2O2 and OH can be quench and prevent further unwarranted oxidation. Control samples are made through running the sample through the flow system without any radiation. Another experimental control is done by adding a radical scavenger (glutamine is popularly used) with the purpose of preventing over oxidation. [@doi:10.1002/pro.3408; @doi:10.1021/ac901054w] FPOP has wide application for proteins, to include being able to report fast protein folding and protein transient dynamics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FPOP is a laser based hydroxyl radical protein footprinting MS method that relies on the irreversible labeling of solvent-exposed amino acid side chains by hydroxyl radicals in order to understand structure elucidation of proteins.
A laser produces 248 nm light to cause hydrogen peroxide to become hydroxyl radicals [@doi:10.1016/j.jasms.2005.09.008; @doi:10.1016/j.ijms.2006.08.018]. 
The flow rate of solution through the capillary and laser frequency are adjusted so that each protein molecule is radiated only once. 
After they are radiated, the sample is collected to a tube that has catalase and free methionine in the buffer so that the H2O2 and hydroxyl radical are quenched to prevent further unwarranted oxidation, which may then modify residues that become exposed due unfolding after the initial labeling. 
Control samples are made through running the sample through the flow system without any radiation. 
Another experimental control is done by adding a radical scavenger (glutamine is popularly used) with the purpose of preventing over oxidation [@doi:10.1002/pro.3408; @doi:10.1021/ac901054w].
FPOP has wide application for proteins, to include being able to report fast protein folding and protein transient dynamics.
```

> 4. protein-painting [@doi:10.1038/ncomms5413; @doi:10.1016/S0959-440X(02)00283-X]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Protein Painting [@doi:10.1038/ncomms5413; @doi:10.1074/jbc.RA118.007310].
```

> Protein painting is an optimized MS-based technique in which first the samples are coated with paint molecules. These paint molecules will coat the surfact but will not have access to the protein-protein interface regions that solvents cannot get to. The parts that are painted will not be subjected to trypsin cleavage while the unpainted areas will. After proteolysis, the peptides samples will be subjected to MS. The samples will only show the unmodified opposing regions in the protein-protein interaction at the time of the painting. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protein painting uses "molecular paints" to noncovalently coat the solvent accessible surface of proteins. 
These paint molecules will coat the protein surfaces but will not have access to the hydrophobic cores or protein-protein interface regions that solvents cannot access. 
If the "paint" cover free amines of lysine side chains, the parts that are painted will not be subjected to trypsin cleavage, while the unpainted areas will. 
After proteolysis, the peptides samples will be subjected to MS. 
The samples will only show the unmodified opposing regions in the protein-protein interaction at the time of the painting. 
```

> 5. LiP-MS (limited proteolysis mass spectrometry) [@doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2020.05.006]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. LiP-MS (limited proteolysis mass spectrometry) [@doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2020.05.006; @DOI:10.1038/nprot.2017.100].
```

> LiP-MS is a two-step process that begins with the separation of proteins of interest using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. The separated proteins are then subjected to a liquid-phase micro-sampling (LPMS) procedure, which allows for the analysis of a small number of proteins at a time. This methodology allows for the identification and quantification of the proteins of interest without the need for sample pre-treatment or proteomic analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LiP-MS is a two-step process that begins with the separation of proteins of interest using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. 
The separated proteins are then subjected to a liquid-phase micro-sampling (LPMS) procedure, which allows for the analysis of a small number of proteins at a time. 
This methodology allows for the identification and quantification of the proteins of interest without the need for sample pre-treatment or proteomic analysis.
```

Reviewer: This is not how I would describe the limited LiP-MS procedure. Can you please re write to answer the following: What is the goal? How does it work? I have not heard of LPMS where does LPMS fit in and what is it? How is it possible to identify without proteomic analysis?

6. radical footprinting 

> This technique uses hydroxyl radical footprinting and MS in order to elucidate protein structures, assembly, and interactions within a large macromolecule. [@doi:10.1002/9781118970195.ch15] Over the years, various approaches to makes hydroxide radicals has been investigated for biological footprinting studies in nucleic acid/ligand interactions. [@doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2005.02.009; @doi:10.1002/0471142700.nc0607s07; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkz089] Below are known methods of producing radicals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This technique uses hydroxyl radical footprinting and MS in order to elucidate protein structures, assembly, and interactions within a large macromolecule [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @DOI:10.1021/ac200567u].
In addition to proteomics applications, various approaches to make hydroxide radicals have also been applied for footprinting studies in nucleic acid/ligand interactions [@doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2005.02.009; @doi:10.1002/0471142700.nc0607s07; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkz089].
Below are known methods of producing radicals for footprinting.
```

1. Fenton and Fenton‐like Chemistry
2. Electron-Pulse Radiolysis
3. High‐Voltage Electrical Discharge
4. Synchrotron X‐ray Radiolysis of Water
5. Plasma Formation of OH Radicals

> 6. Photolysis of Hydrogen Peroxide

Reviewer: can we have a citation example for each method?

Author: It is there now

Reviewer: AWESOME!

This chapter is very useful in learning more on this topic. [@doi:10.1002/9781118970195.ch15]

> 7. ion mobility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Protein stability and small molecule binding
1. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) 
2. cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA) [@doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2019.11.004]
CETSA is a powerful tool for studying protein-protein interactions in live cells. Although CTSA has been widely used to study protein-protein interactions in a proteome-wide manner, little is known about the global changes of protein interaction states with the energy landscape. The assay is capable of detecting shifts in the thermal equilibrium of cellular proteins in response to a variety of environmental perturbations, including the application of voltage, temperature, or magnetic fields. This assay is able to detect both small and large changes in protein interaction states, making it an ideal tool for investigating the effects of environmental stressors on protein interactions.

> ### Protein-protein interactions (PPIs)
> 1. AP-MS 
> 2. APEX 
> 3. BioID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- todo: 

### Protein-protein interactions (PPIs)
1. AP-MS 
2. APEX 
3. BioID
-->
```
